---
layout: post
title: Yet another guide to Python documentation with Sphinx and ReadTheDocs
---

I have found a number of posts about setting up Sphinx and autodoc for python projects, notably [this excellent post](https://samnicholls.net/2016/06/15/how-to-sphinx-readthedocs/). However, despite all these resources I still spent a couple of hours running into edge cases with ReadTheDocs that were not covered in these other resources. So, to save you all (and my future self) sometime I am writing all this down in one post.

# Our example project directory
For this post I will create an example project directory called `sphinx-ex`

The directory structure of this project is as follows:

```
sphinx-ex
      |
      /sphinx-ex
            |
            /core
               |
                mymodule.py
      /tests
      README.md
```

We have a top-level project directory `sphinx-ex`, our python package directory `sphinxex`, and a directory to hold our modules `core`, and another directory holding our test `tests`.

# Install sphinx
You can install sphinx using pip

```bash
pip install sphinx
```

# Setting up the Sphinx scaffolding

**Create a `docs` directory**

```bash
mkdir docs
```


**Create the sphinx scaffolding**

We can use `sphinx-quickstart` to create some basic sphinx scaffolding to use for our project. We need to run it inside our docs directory.

```bash
cd docs
sphinx-quickstart
```

Sphinx will prompt you with a number of interactive inputs. In general you can accept the defaults of `no` for this simple project with **ONE EXCEPTION**. We want to enable to autodoc extension to be able to use `sphinx-apidoc` to create documentation from our docstrings.

```
autodoc: automatically insert docstrings from modules (y/n) [n]: y
```

Our `docs` directory now looks like the following:

```bash
jarales:docs jmills$ ls
Makefile	_static		conf.py
_build		_templates	index.rst
```

**Examine sphinx-quickstart artifacts**

`sphinx-quickstart` has created a number of directories and files, and I will briefly discuss two important ones. The `_build` directory contains stubs used by `sphinx-autodoc` to create the api documentation, and The `conf.py` contains configuration options. For this simple case we can leave the stubs in the `_build` directory alone, but there are a few options we need to change in the `conf.py` file.

**Run `sphinx-apidoc` to autodoc our code**
Now that we have our scaffolding in place we will run the `sphinx-apidoc` utility to create stubs for autodoc. `sphinx-apidoc` takes two option arguments for our purposes, the first is the output directory, we will set it to `source` for this case, and the second is the package directory `sphinxex` in this case. We need to run this command in our `docs` directory.

```
sphinx-apidoc -o source/ ../sphinxex
```

# Configuring our scaffolding and creating the html documentation
Here will will fill out the scaffolding and create our html documentation locally. In the next section we will go over the last steps needed to make the documentation autogenerate on ReadTheDocs.

**Edit the `conf.py` file**
The first thing we need to do is uncomment lines 15-17 and add an additional line.

`conf.py`
```python
import os
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('.'))
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('../'))
```

As noted at the start of this post, we have a few peculiarities about our project that we need to deal with. First is that we are using google-style docstrings. We need to add an extension to allow sphinx to parse these strings. We do this by adding the 'sphinx.ext.napoleon' to the list of extensions on line ~79 and editing some options below.

```
extensions = [
    'sphinx.ext.autodoc',
    'sphinx.ext.napoleon'
]
napoleon_google_docstring = True
napoleon_use_param = False
napoleon_use_ivar = True
```

However, we have another issue with our docstrings, we are using type hints in the definitions. For example,

```python
def foo(bar: str):
    print(bar)
```

This issue needs to be addressed on the ReadTheDocs side, which I will cover later.

An optional edit is to set the default theme in sphinx to that of ReadTheDocs. We do this by editing the `html_theme` option on line ~79.

```python
html_theme = 'sphinx_rtd_theme'
```

**Generate our documentation locally**
We are now ready to generate our documentation locally. We will do this locally first to make sure sphinx is configured properly and then we will make the necessary changes to make it work with the ReadTheDocs service.

```
make html
```

You should now have new directories and files in your `docs/_build` directory. The `html` directory contains the documentation html files.

```
cd _build/html
ls
_sources		index.html		search.html
_static			objects.inv		searchindex.js
genindex.html		py-modindex.html	source
```

# Dealing with ReadTheDocs issues
As noted at the top of this blog, we have two main issues with our package that affect ReadTheDocs. The first is that we import a module only available on conda-forge. The second is that we use type hints in our definitions. There are easy workarounds for these if you know what to do.

## conda-forge packages
To use conda-forge packages we need to tell ReadTheDocs to use a conda environment for the build. We also need to specify that environment.

**Create a readthedocs.yml file**
ReadTheDocs allows builds to be configured using a readthedocs.yml file. For this simple project the following yml file will suffice.

```yml
build:
    image: latest
conda:
  file: doc/environment.yml
python:
   version: 3.6
   setup_py_install: true
```

We will go through this line-by-line:

`image: latest` - To use pytohn 3.6 we need to specify the build image as latest. **Note** Python 3.6 is required by sphinx and ReadTheDocs to use in-line type hints.

`file: doc/environment.yml` - We specify our conda environment file to use for the conda build.

`version: 3.6` - We specify our python version as 3.6

`setup_py_install: true` - run setup.py install

**Create our conda environment file**
Because we are using conda for our build, we need to specify the conda environment to ReadTheDocs.

For this simple project we only have one dependencies on conda-forge, f90nml.

```
name: sphinxex-docs
channels:
  - conda-forge
  - defaults
dependencies:
  - python=3.6
  - f90nml
```

First thing to note here is that we specify conda-forge as our primary channel for conda. Next we specify our dependencies as python 3.6 and f90nml. **Note** We have to specify the python version in the conda environment file as well as our readthedocs.yml file.

# Thats it!